So we said we often use weak references to allow us to
attach so‑called metadata to an object.
And, again, an example being if we have a class that's marked as final,
then we can't derive from my class, we can't extend the class.
And we tend to make this work with something called a WeakHashMap.
So a WeakHashMap is like a hashmap,
except that the key is actually a weak reference to an
object and not a strong reference.
So the idea now is that the key is an object.
Once all strong references to that key are cleared, then the
key itself is removed from the hashmap.
So we store a weak reference to an object as a key,
and then as the value for this key, we store this object's metadata.
And again,
I've placed this in quotes because this could be any extra
data we want associated with this object.
So when the object has no more strong references,
the key is released, and the object's metadata is also released.
So it's something like this.
Diagrammatically, we have a WeakHashMap here.
We allocate an object.
Again, we're using our person object.
And we store a reference in that object inside the WeakHashMap.
The key is held as a weak reference to the object,
and then the value is held as a reference to this object's metadata.
When we release the object, the weak reference also goes away.
And at this point, the value is also cleared,
so the object's metadata also goes away.
So let's see an example of that.
So to show you how to use a WeakHashMap,
I'm going to create a class called Person, and we'll mark this as final.
So this is a class that cannot be extended.
And then I'll create another class called PersonMetaData.
And in this class,
I want to hold a date, and let's say this is the date of when the
person object was downloaded from the internet.
So we'll give our class a constructor, so we'll create a PersonMetaData
constructor. And this constructor will simply set the date.
So we'll say data = new Date.
And we'll also add a toString method here.
And in the ToString method,
we'll simply return the date that this person was created.
So in Main, I'm going to create a WeakHashMap,
and our WeakHashMap is going to have a key to value.
Now remember,
the key is the object that we care about, and the
value is that object's metadata.
So the key will be person, and the value will be of type PersonMetaData.
And we'll just call this thing WeakHashMap,
and we will set it to be a new WeakHashMap of Person to PersonMetaData.
I can then do Person, and I say kevin, that'll be me,
= new Person and then do weakHashMap.put.
And into here, I'm going to put Kevin and new PersonMetaData.
So now I have a strong reference to a person object with kevin,
and I have a weak reference to a person object
that's held inside this WeakHashMap.
If at this point, I do PersonMetaData p = WeakHashMap.get and I pass in Kevin,
then that should retrieve the key.
So I should be able to print out the person object, so
I'll just print out the PersonMetaData.
And we can run this and see what the output looks like.
So I'll run the application, and there we see,
we get a PersonMetaData object back.
So now if I say kevin = null,
so how do we prove this value is no longer in the WeakHashMap? We
can't simply do a WeakHashMap.get now because kevin,
which is the key,
is now null. So it'll try and get a null value as the key when
there isn't a null value of the key inside there.
So instead of that, we can use weakHashMap.containsValue.
So if our WeakHashMap contains the PersonMetaData as a value still,
let's print out the message,
which is still contains key. And if it doesn't, we
print out a message saying key gone.
So if we run this code,
then we see the key has gone. So by setting the key to null and then
running a garbage collection on this thing, the key no longer has a
strong reference to it. That causes the WeakHashMap to give up its
weak reference on the object.
When that weak reference goes away, then the strong reference to the metadata is garbage‑collected.